README.md, before:

# omni-devenv-fusion

> Exploring the potential of AI and LLMs in software development

A development environment for **AI-assisted SDLC**: leveraging Claude Code + MCP to orchestrate expert personas, automate workflows, and push the boundaries of what's possible in software engineering.

## Core Philosophy

**"The Bridge" Pattern**: Translate generic LLM capabilities into project-compliant execution.

```
User Request -> Orchestrator (Plan) -> Expert Personas (Consult) -> Coder (Implement) -> Validate -> User
```

## Key Capabilities

| Capability             | Description                                                                           |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Persona Delegation** | Route queries to `architect`, `platform_expert`, `devops_mlops`, `sre`, `tech_writer` |
| **Writing Standards**  | Automated documentation polishing via `polish_text` tool                              |
| **Code Quality**       | AST-based refactoring with `ast-grep`                                                 |
| **Safe Execution**     | Sandboxed `just` commands via `run_task`                                              |
| **Memory Persistence** | Long-term project memory via `memory_garden`                                          |

## Quick Start

```bash
# Clone and enter
git clone https://github.com/tao3k/omni-devenv-fusion.git
cd omni-devenv-fusion

# Setup (checks secrets first, then activates direnv)
just setup

# View all commands
just

# Validate everything
just validate
```

### First-Time Setup

The `just setup` command automates the initial configuration:

1. **Detects secrets status** - Checks if secrets are configured
2. **Auto-manages claude module** - If secrets missing, disables claude module automatically
3. **Activates direnv** - Loads the development environment

**First run (secrets not configured):**

```bash
just setup

# Output:
# 🚀 Setting up development environment...
# Step 1/3: Checking secrets configuration...
# ⚠️  Secrets not configured.
#    Disabling claude module for initial setup...
#    ✅ claude module disabled.
# Step 2/3: Activating direnv (without claude module)...
# Step 3/3: Environment ready (limited mode).
#
# 📝 Next steps:
#    1. Configure secrets: https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/
#    2. Verify: just secrets-check
#    3. Re-run: just setup
```

**After secrets configured:**

```bash
just secrets-check  # Verify secrets are working
just setup          # Re-run to restore claude module

# Output:
# 🚀 Setting up development environment...
# Step 1/3: Checking secrets configuration...
# ✅ Secrets OK!
# Step 2/3: Restoring claude module if needed...
#    ✅ claude module restored!
# Step 3/3: Activating direnv...
# 🎉 Environment fully ready!
```

### Secret Providers

Configure secrets using one of these providers:

| Provider    | Description                              | Docs                                                         |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `keyring`   | System keyring (macOS Keychain, KWallet) | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |
| `1password` | 1Password                                | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |
| `lastpass`  | LastPass                                 | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |
| `dotenv`    | .env file                                | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |
| `env`       | Environment variables                    | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |

## Key Features

### 🤖 Orchestrator-Worker Pattern

Claude Code acts as the **Lead Architect & Orchestrator**, delegating complex tasks to specialized experts via MCP:

- **`architect`**: High-level design, refactoring strategies
- **`platform_expert`**: Nix/OS configuration, infrastructure
- **`devops_mlops`**: CI/CD pipelines, build workflows
- **`sre`**: Reliability, observability, security

```bash
# Example: Consult multiple experts for a complex task
just agent-commit "feat" "" "add redis service"
# Delegates to platform_expert for devenv config,
# devops_mlops for CI/CD, sre for health checks
```

### ⚡ Agent-Friendly Commands

All commands support non-interactive execution for AI agents:

| Command                                       | Description               |
| --------------------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| `just agent-commit <type> "" <msg>`           | Non-interactive commit    |
| `just agent-validate`                         | Run all checks            |
| `just agent-fmt`                              | Apply formatting fixes    |
| `just agent-bump [auto\|patch\|minor\|major]` | Version bump              |
| `just agent-release`                          | Complete release workflow |

### 🏥 SRE Health Checks

Built-in health monitoring with machine-parseable JSON output:

```bash
# Human-readable
just health

# Machine-parseable (for CI/AI)
JUST_JSON=true just health-report
# {"component":"git","branch":"main",...}
```

Available checks:

- `health-git` - Repository status
- `health-nix` - Nix environment
- `health-devenv` - Devenv configuration
- `health-secrets` - Secret availability
- `health-api-keys` - API key validation

### 📦 Reproducible Environments

- **devenv**: Declarative development shells with Nix
- **direnv**: Automatic environment loading
- **omnibus**: Modular configuration framework
- **flake-parts**: Composable Nix modules

### 🔄 Modern SDLC

- **Conventional Commits**: Enforced via conform
- **Automated Changelog**: Generated with cocogitto
- **Semantic Versioning**: Auto-bump based on commits
- **Git Hooks**: lefthook + omnibus framework

## Architecture

```
omni-devenv-fusion/
├── devenv.nix              # Main devenv configuration
├── devenv.yaml             # Flake inputs
├── justfile                # Task runner (40+ commands)
├── CLAUDE.md               # Orchestrator instructions
├── modules/
│   ├── claude.nix          # Claude Code + MCP servers
│   ├── lefthook.nix        # Git hooks (omnibus)
│   ├── python.nix          # Python environment
│   └── flake-parts/
│       └── omnibus.nix     # Omnibus framework
└── mcp-server/
    └── orchestrator.py     # Expert consultation server
```

## Available Commands

### Validation & Quality

```bash
just validate      # Run all checks (fmt, lint, test)
just check-format  # Check formatting only
just check-commits # Validate commit messages
just lint          # Run linters
just fmt           # Format code
just test          # Run tests
```

### Changelog & Version

```bash
just changelog-preview  # Preview next release
just changelog-stats    # Commit statistics
just version            # Show current version
just bump-auto          # Auto-bump version
just bump-patch         # Bump patch (0.0.X)
```

### Git Operations

```bash
just status            # Repository status
just log               # Recent commits
just agent-commit      # Non-interactive commit
just commit            # Interactive commit (human)
```

### Health & Diagnostics

```bash
just health            # Full health check
just health-report     # JSON report (for AI/CI)
just secrets-check     # Secret availability
just info              # Environment info
```

### Release

```bash
just pre-release       # Pre-release checklist
just release           # Complete release
just publish-release   # Publish to GitHub
```

### MCP Server

```bash
just run               # Run MCP server
just debug             # Debug with MCP Inspector
just test-mcp          # Syntax check + startup test
just test_basic        # Basic MCP tests
just test_workflow     # Workflow integration tests
```

## Claude Code Integration

### PostToolUse Hook

Claude Code automatically runs quality checks after edits:

```nix
claude.code.hooks = {
  PostToolUse = {
    command = "lefthook run pre-commit";
    matcher = "^(Edit|MultiEdit|Write)$";
  };
};
```

### MCP Servers

- **devenv**: Local devenv context
- **nixos**: NixOS package/option search
- **orchestrator**: Expert consultation (architect, platform_expert, devops_mlops, sre)

### MCP Server Commands

```bash
# Run the MCP orchestrator server
just run

# Debug with MCP Inspector
just debug

# Test MCP server functionality
just test-mcp       # Syntax check + server startup
just test_basic     # Run basic MCP tests
just test_workflow  # Run workflow integration tests
```

### Testing

```bash
# Run basic tests (MCP initialization, tools, context)
uv run python tests/test_basic.py

# Run full workflow tests (consult_specialist, personas)
uv run python tests/workflows.py
```

### Orchestrator Workflow

```python
# MCP orchestrator.py provides expert consultation
from mcp.server.fastmcp import FastMCP

mcp = FastMCP("orchestrator-tools")

@mcp.tool()
def consult_specialist(role: str, query: str) -> str:
    """Consult AI expert for domain-specific guidance"""
    # Returns expert opinion based on role
```

## Conventional Commits

All commits follow the specification:

```
<type>: <description>

Types: feat, fix, docs, style, refactor, perf, test, build, ci, chore
```

### Examples

```bash
# Agent (automated)
just agent-commit "feat" "" "add sre health checks"

# Human (interactive)
just commit
# Guides through type/scope/body/breaking change selection
```

## Secret Management

Secrets are managed via **secretspec**, a tool for secure credential handling. Multiple providers are supported.

### Supported Providers

| Provider    | Description                              | Use Case          |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------- | ----------------- |
| `keyring`   | System keyring (macOS Keychain, KWallet) | Local development |
| `1password` | 1Password                                | Team sharing      |
| `lastpass`  | LastPass                                 | Team sharing      |
| `dotenv`    | .env file                                | Local development |
| `env`       | Environment variables                    | CI/CD             |

### Configuration

**Provider Selection** (in `devenv.yaml`):

```yaml
secretspec:
  enable: true
  provider: dotenv # or: keyring, onepassword, lastpass, env
  profile: development
```

**Secret Definitions** (in `secretspec.toml`):

```toml
[project]
name = "omni-devenv-fusion"
revision = "1.0"

[profiles.default]
MINIMAX_API_KEY = { description = "API key for MiniMax", required = true }

[profiles.development]
# Inherits from default, override as needed
```

### Setup Commands

```bash
# Check secret status
just secrets-check

# View secrets info
just secrets-info

# Set a secret (interactive)
just secrets-set-minimax

# Or use secretspec directly
secretspec set MINIMAX_API_KEY --value "your-api-key"
secretspec set MINIMAX_API_KEY --profile development --value "dev-key"

# Get secret value (masked)
secretspec get MINIMAX_API_KEY
```

### Dotenv Setup (Optional)

If using dotenv as provider:

```bash
# 1. Create .env.development file in project root
# 2. Add secrets to .env.development file
#    Run: just secrets-set-minimax
```

## Development

```bash
# Setup
just setup

# Iterate
just validate  # Before committing
just agent-commit "fix" "" "fix bug"

# Release
just pre-release
just release
```

## Resources

- [devenv.sh](https://devenv.sh) - Development environments with Nix
- [Nix Manual](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/) - Nix package manager
- [just](https://github.com/casey/just) - Command runner
- [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) - Commit message specification
- [cocogitto](https://github.com/cocogitto/cocogitto) - Changelog and version management
- [lefthook](https://github.com/evilmartians/lefthook) - Git hooks manager
- [omnibus](https://github.com/tao3k/omnibus) - Configuration framework
- [secretspec](https://github.com/tao3k/secretspec) - Secret management
- [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code) - AI coding assistant

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make changes following conventional commits
4. Run `just validate` to ensure checks pass
5. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

## Acknowledgments

Built with modern tools that empower AI-assisted software development:

- **Anthropic Claude Code** - AI-powered coding assistant with MCP support
- **devenv** - Reproducible development environments
- **Nix ecosystem** - Declarative package management
- **omnibus framework** - Advanced configuration management
- **cocogitto** - Automated changelog and versioning
- **lefthook** - Fast and powerful Git hooks

Special thanks to the maintainers of these projects for enabling the AI-SDLC workflow.

---

Built with ❤️ using devenv, Nix, and Claude Code

Commit message:

docs(docs): add vision and key differentiators to README

README.md, after:

# omni-devenv-fusion

> From Copilot to Autopilot: Building the OS for the post-IDE era.

## The Vision

**Copilot** (today): AI helps you write code, you drive.

**Autopilot** (tomorrow): AI drives, you architect.

The gap is State, Memory, Policy, Orchestration. omni-devenv-fusion fills this gap.

## Key Differentiators

| Differentiator             | Why It Matters                                       |
| -------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| **Dual-MCP**               | Strategy (Orchestrator) + Tactics (Coder)            |
| **The Cortex**             | Intent → Right Tool, every time                      |
| **The Immune System**      | AI reviews code against your standards before commit |
| **Auto-Loaded Context**    | Project rules loaded at session start                |
| **Actions Over Apologies** | LLM demonstrates fixes, not apologies                |

## Quick Links

| Topic        | Location                                                        |
| ------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Architecture | `mcp-server/README.md`, `mcp-server/architecture-philosophy.md` |
| MCP Tools    | `mcp-server/orchestrator.py`                                    |
| Workflows    | `agent/how-to/*.md`                                             |
| Standards    | `agent/standards/*.md`                                          |

## Core Philosophy

**"The Bridge" Pattern**: Translate generic LLM capabilities into project-compliant execution.

```
User Request -> Orchestrator (Plan) -> Expert Personas (Consult) -> Coder (Implement) -> Validate -> User
```

## Key Capabilities

| Capability             | Description                                                                           |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Persona Delegation** | Route queries to `architect`, `platform_expert`, `devops_mlops`, `sre`, `tech_writer` |
| **Writing Standards**  | Automated documentation polishing via `polish_text` tool                              |
| **Code Quality**       | AST-based refactoring with `ast-grep`                                                 |
| **Safe Execution**     | Sandboxed `just` commands via `run_task`                                              |
| **Memory Persistence** | Long-term project memory via `memory_garden`                                          |

## Quick Start

```bash
# Clone and enter
git clone https://github.com/tao3k/omni-devenv-fusion.git
cd omni-devenv-fusion

# Setup (checks secrets first, then activates direnv)
just setup

# View all commands
just

# Validate everything
just validate
```

### First-Time Setup

The `just setup` command automates the initial configuration:

1. **Detects secrets status** - Checks if secrets are configured
2. **Auto-manages claude module** - If secrets missing, disables claude module automatically
3. **Activates direnv** - Loads the development environment

**First run (secrets not configured):**

```bash
just setup

# Output:
# 🚀 Setting up development environment...
# Step 1/3: Checking secrets configuration...
# ⚠️  Secrets not configured.
#    Disabling claude module for initial setup...
#    ✅ claude module disabled.
# Step 2/3: Activating direnv (without claude module)...
# Step 3/3: Environment ready (limited mode).
#
# 📝 Next steps:
#    1. Configure secrets: https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/
#    2. Verify: just secrets-check
#    3. Re-run: just setup
```

**After secrets configured:**

```bash
just secrets-check  # Verify secrets are working
just setup          # Re-run to restore claude module

# Output:
# 🚀 Setting up development environment...
# Step 1/3: Checking secrets configuration...
# ✅ Secrets OK!
# Step 2/3: Restoring claude module if needed...
#    ✅ claude module restored!
# Step 3/3: Activating direnv...
# 🎉 Environment fully ready!
```

### Secret Providers

Configure secrets using one of these providers:

| Provider    | Description                              | Docs                                                         |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `keyring`   | System keyring (macOS Keychain, KWallet) | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |
| `1password` | 1Password                                | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |
| `lastpass`  | LastPass                                 | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |
| `dotenv`    | .env file                                | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |
| `env`       | Environment variables                    | [secretspec.dev](https://secretspec.dev/concepts/providers/) |

## Key Features

### 🤖 Orchestrator-Worker Pattern

Claude Code acts as the **Lead Architect & Orchestrator**, delegating complex tasks to specialized experts via MCP:

- **`architect`**: High-level design, refactoring strategies
- **`platform_expert`**: Nix/OS configuration, infrastructure
- **`devops_mlops`**: CI/CD pipelines, build workflows
- **`sre`**: Reliability, observability, security

```bash
# Example: Consult multiple experts for a complex task
just agent-commit "feat" "" "add redis service"
# Delegates to platform_expert for devenv config,
# devops_mlops for CI/CD, sre for health checks
```

### ⚡ Agent-Friendly Commands

All commands support non-interactive execution for AI agents:

| Command                                       | Description               |
| --------------------------------------------- | ------------------------- |
| `just agent-commit <type> "" <msg>`           | Non-interactive commit    |
| `just agent-validate`                         | Run all checks            |
| `just agent-fmt`                              | Apply formatting fixes    |
| `just agent-bump [auto\|patch\|minor\|major]` | Version bump              |
| `just agent-release`                          | Complete release workflow |

### 🏥 SRE Health Checks

Built-in health monitoring with machine-parseable JSON output:

```bash
# Human-readable
just health

# Machine-parseable (for CI/AI)
JUST_JSON=true just health-report
# {"component":"git","branch":"main",...}
```

Available checks:

- `health-git` - Repository status
- `health-nix` - Nix environment
- `health-devenv` - Devenv configuration
- `health-secrets` - Secret availability
- `health-api-keys` - API key validation

### 📦 Reproducible Environments

- **devenv**: Declarative development shells with Nix
- **direnv**: Automatic environment loading
- **omnibus**: Modular configuration framework
- **flake-parts**: Composable Nix modules

### 🔄 Modern SDLC

- **Conventional Commits**: Enforced via conform
- **Automated Changelog**: Generated with cocogitto
- **Semantic Versioning**: Auto-bump based on commits
- **Git Hooks**: lefthook + omnibus framework

## Architecture

```
omni-devenv-fusion/
├── devenv.nix              # Main devenv configuration
├── devenv.yaml             # Flake inputs
├── justfile                # Task runner (40+ commands)
├── CLAUDE.md               # Orchestrator instructions
├── modules/
│   ├── claude.nix          # Claude Code + MCP servers
│   ├── lefthook.nix        # Git hooks (omnibus)
│   ├── python.nix          # Python environment
│   └── flake-parts/
│       └── omnibus.nix     # Omnibus framework
└── mcp-server/
    └── orchestrator.py     # Expert consultation server
```

## Available Commands

### Validation & Quality

```bash
just validate      # Run all checks (fmt, lint, test)
just check-format  # Check formatting only
just check-commits # Validate commit messages
just lint          # Run linters
just fmt           # Format code
just test          # Run tests
```

### Changelog & Version

```bash
just changelog-preview  # Preview next release
just changelog-stats    # Commit statistics
just version            # Show current version
just bump-auto          # Auto-bump version
just bump-patch         # Bump patch (0.0.X)
```

### Git Operations

```bash
just status            # Repository status
just log               # Recent commits
just agent-commit      # Non-interactive commit
just commit            # Interactive commit (human)
```

### Health & Diagnostics

```bash
just health            # Full health check
just health-report     # JSON report (for AI/CI)
just secrets-check     # Secret availability
just info              # Environment info
```

### Release

```bash
just pre-release       # Pre-release checklist
just release           # Complete release
just publish-release   # Publish to GitHub
```

### MCP Server

```bash
just run               # Run MCP server
just debug             # Debug with MCP Inspector
just test-mcp          # Syntax check + startup test
just test_basic        # Basic MCP tests
just test_workflow     # Workflow integration tests
```

## Claude Code Integration

### PostToolUse Hook

Claude Code automatically runs quality checks after edits:

```nix
claude.code.hooks = {
  PostToolUse = {
    command = "lefthook run pre-commit";
    matcher = "^(Edit|MultiEdit|Write)$";
  };
};
```

### MCP Servers

- **devenv**: Local devenv context
- **nixos**: NixOS package/option search
- **orchestrator**: Expert consultation (architect, platform_expert, devops_mlops, sre)

### MCP Server Commands

```bash
# Run the MCP orchestrator server
just run

# Debug with MCP Inspector
just debug

# Test MCP server functionality
just test-mcp       # Syntax check + server startup
just test_basic     # Run basic MCP tests
just test_workflow  # Run workflow integration tests
```

### Testing

```bash
# Run basic tests (MCP initialization, tools, context)
uv run python tests/test_basic.py

# Run full workflow tests (consult_specialist, personas)
uv run python tests/workflows.py
```

### Orchestrator Workflow

```python
# MCP orchestrator.py provides expert consultation
from mcp.server.fastmcp import FastMCP

mcp = FastMCP("orchestrator-tools")

@mcp.tool()
def consult_specialist(role: str, query: str) -> str:
    """Consult AI expert for domain-specific guidance"""
    # Returns expert opinion based on role
```

## Conventional Commits

All commits follow the specification:

```
<type>: <description>

Types: feat, fix, docs, style, refactor, perf, test, build, ci, chore
```

### Examples

```bash
# Agent (automated)
just agent-commit "feat" "" "add sre health checks"

# Human (interactive)
just commit
# Guides through type/scope/body/breaking change selection
```

## Secret Management

Secrets are managed via **secretspec**, a tool for secure credential handling. Multiple providers are supported.

### Supported Providers

| Provider    | Description                              | Use Case          |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------- | ----------------- |
| `keyring`   | System keyring (macOS Keychain, KWallet) | Local development |
| `1password` | 1Password                                | Team sharing      |
| `lastpass`  | LastPass                                 | Team sharing      |
| `dotenv`    | .env file                                | Local development |
| `env`       | Environment variables                    | CI/CD             |

### Configuration

**Provider Selection** (in `devenv.yaml`):

```yaml
secretspec:
  enable: true
  provider: dotenv # or: keyring, onepassword, lastpass, env
  profile: development
```

**Secret Definitions** (in `secretspec.toml`):

```toml
[project]
name = "omni-devenv-fusion"
revision = "1.0"

[profiles.default]
MINIMAX_API_KEY = { description = "API key for MiniMax", required = true }

[profiles.development]
# Inherits from default, override as needed
```

### Setup Commands

```bash
# Check secret status
just secrets-check

# View secrets info
just secrets-info

# Set a secret (interactive)
just secrets-set-minimax

# Or use secretspec directly
secretspec set MINIMAX_API_KEY --value "your-api-key"
secretspec set MINIMAX_API_KEY --profile development --value "dev-key"

# Get secret value (masked)
secretspec get MINIMAX_API_KEY
```

### Dotenv Setup (Optional)

If using dotenv as provider:

```bash
# 1. Create .env.development file in project root
# 2. Add secrets to .env.development file
#    Run: just secrets-set-minimax
```

## Development

```bash
# Setup
just setup

# Iterate
just validate  # Before committing
just agent-commit "fix" "" "fix bug"

# Release
just pre-release
just release
```

## Resources

- [devenv.sh](https://devenv.sh) - Development environments with Nix
- [Nix Manual](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/) - Nix package manager
- [just](https://github.com/casey/just) - Command runner
- [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/) - Commit message specification
- [cocogitto](https://github.com/cocogitto/cocogitto) - Changelog and version management
- [lefthook](https://github.com/evilmartians/lefthook) - Git hooks manager
- [omnibus](https://github.com/tao3k/omnibus) - Configuration framework
- [secretspec](https://github.com/tao3k/secretspec) - Secret management
- [Claude Code](https://claude.com/claude-code) - AI coding assistant

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make changes following conventional commits
4. Run `just validate` to ensure checks pass
5. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

## Acknowledgments

Built with modern tools that empower AI-assisted software development:

- **Anthropic Claude Code** - AI-powered coding assistant with MCP support
- **devenv** - Reproducible development environments
- **Nix ecosystem** - Declarative package management
- **omnibus framework** - Advanced configuration management
- **cocogitto** - Automated changelog and versioning
- **lefthook** - Fast and powerful Git hooks

Special thanks to the maintainers of these projects for enabling the AI-SDLC workflow.

---

Built with ❤️ using devenv, Nix, and Claude Code
