assets/knowledge/harvested/20260102-architecture-neural matrix rag implementati.md, before:

# Neural Matrix RAG Implementation with ChromaDB

**Category**: architecture
**Date**: 2026-01-02
**Harvested**: Automatically from development session

## Context

Phase 11 implemented RAG capabilities for the Tri-MCP system, requiring vector storage for knowledge base functionality. The system needed self-hosting capability to avoid external dependencies while maintaining powerful semantic search and consultation features.

## Solution

Integrated ChromaDB for persistent vector storage with self-hosting capability. Created the Librarian capability as an orchestrator interface that provides consult_knowledge_base and ingest_knowledge tools. Added Rich terminal utilities for improved developer experience and implemented consult_specialist tool for expert persona consultations. The architecture separates concerns through core vector store, capability layer, and tool routing.

## Key Takeaways

- Self-hosted ChromaDB eliminates external dependencies while providing enterprise-grade vector search capabilities
- Layered architecture with core, capabilities, and tools provides clean separation of concerns and maintainability
- Rich terminal utilities significantly improve developer experience during MCP server development and debugging
- Capability-based design allows modular addition of RAG features without coupling to specific implementations

## Pattern / Snippet

```architecture
class LibrarianCapability:
    def __init__(self, vector_store: VectorStore):
        self.vector_store = vector_store

    async def consult_knowledge_base(self, query: str) -> List[Document]:
        return await self.vector_store.similarity_search(query)

    async def ingest_knowledge(self, documents: List[Document]) -> bool:
        return await self.vector_store.add_documents(documents)
```

## Related Files

- `src/agent/core/vector_store.py`
- `src/agent/capabilities/librarian.py`

Commit message:

refactor: remove all ChromaDB references, migrate to LanceDB
- Update docs: librarian.md (new), trinity-architecture.md, routing.md, discover.md
- Remove "Migrated from ChromaDB" comments from vector_store files
- Mark harvested knowledge files as ARCHIVAL with warnings
- Update test files: fake_vectorstore, semantic_cortex, stress_tests
- Replace ChromaDB with LanceDB in zettelkasten spec and configs

assets/knowledge/harvested/20260102-architecture-neural matrix rag implementati.md, after:

# [ARCHIVAL] Neural Matrix RAG Implementation with ChromaDB

> **WARNING**: This document describes OLD architecture that has been migrated to LanceDB.
> Current implementation uses omni-vector (Rust + LanceDB). See `docs/reference/librarian.md`.

**Category**: architecture
**Date**: 2026-01-02
**Harvested**: Automatically from development session
**Status**: OBSOLETE - Migrated to LanceDB

## Context

Phase 11 implemented RAG capabilities for the Tri-MCP system, requiring vector storage for knowledge base functionality. The system needed self-hosting capability to avoid external dependencies while maintaining powerful semantic search and consultation features.

## Solution (OLD - See Warning Above)

Integrated ChromaDB for persistent vector storage with self-hosting capability. Created the Librarian capability as an orchestrator interface that provides consult_knowledge_base and ingest_knowledge tools.

## Key Takeaways

- Self-hosted vector storage eliminates external dependencies (now via LanceDB)
- Layered architecture with core, capabilities, and tools provides clean separation of concerns and maintainability
- Rich terminal utilities significantly improve developer experience during MCP server development and debugging
- Capability-based design allows modular addition of RAG features without coupling to specific implementations
