docs/reference/weighted-rrf.md, before:

# Weighted RRF + Field Boosting - SOTA Hybrid Search

> Trinity Architecture - Router Layer (L2 Semantic)
> Last Updated: 2026-01-27

A hybrid retrieval algorithm based on 2024-2025 cutting-edge research, combining **Weighted Reciprocal Rank Fusion (WRRF)** with **BM25F-inspired Field Boosting**.

## Theoretical Background

### Problem: The "Smoothing Trap" of Standard RRF

Standard RRF (`k=60`) is too smooth, resulting in minimal ranking differences:

| Rank | Standard RRF Score | Problem              |
| ---- | ------------------ | -------------------- |
| #1   | 0.0163             | Low discriminability |
| #5   | 0.0153             | Only 6% difference   |

For **Precision-Critical** scenarios like code tools, this fails to effectively distinguish between `git.commit` and `git.status`.

### Solutions

1. **Weighted RRF**: Introduce weighted differentiation for signal sources
2. **Low-k**: Use `k=10` to increase ranking sensitivity
3. **Field Boosting**: Inject exact match signals

## Algorithm Details

### 1. Weighted Vector Stream

```
RRF_vector = W_semantic * (1 / (k + rank + 1))
```

Parameters:

- `W_semantic = 1.0`
- `k = 10` (high precision mode)

### 2. Weighted Keyword Stream

```
RRF_keyword = W_keyword * (1 / (k + rank + 1))
```

Parameters:

- `W_keyword = 1.5` (keywords weighted higher for code scenarios)

### 3. Dynamic Field Boosting (The Magic Step)

Solves the confidence flattening problem by injecting hard signals:

```rust
// Token Match Boost: +0.2 per matched term
for term in query_parts {
    if name_lower.contains(term) {
        match_count += 1;
    }
}
entry.score += match_count * 0.2;

// Exact Phrase Match: +0.5
if name_lower.contains(&query_lower) {
    entry.score += 0.5;
}
```

### 4. Confidence Calibration (Rust Binding)

Raw RRF scores are calibrated in Rust payload emission:

| Condition                   | Confidence | Final Score Formula                          |
| --------------------------- | ---------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| `score >= high_threshold`   | `high`     | `min(high_cap, high_base + score*scale)`     |
| `score >= medium_threshold` | `medium`   | `min(medium_cap, medium_base + score*scale)` |
| otherwise                   | `low`      | `max(low_floor, score)`                      |

The profile is configured from `settings.yaml` (`router.search.*`) and passed to Rust.

## Configuration

### Default Values (Code Search Optimization)

```python
{
    "rrf_k": 10,              # High precision factor
    "semantic_weight": 1.0,   # Vector weight
    "keyword_weight": 1.5,    # Keyword weight (higher for code)
    "name_token_boost": 0.2,  # Token match boost
    "exact_phrase_boost": 0.5, # Phrase match boost
}
```

### Scenario-Specific Configurations

```python
# High Precision (Code Tools)
search.stats() => {
    "rrf_k": 10,
    "keyword_weight": 1.5,
}

# High Recall (Chat/Q&A)
search.stats() => {
    "rrf_k": 60,
    "keyword_weight": 1.0,
}
```

## Effect Comparison

### Query: `"git commit"`

| Tool       | Standard RRF | Weighted RRF + Boosting          |
| ---------- | ------------ | -------------------------------- |
| git.commit | 0.016        | **1.1** (+ exact match + tokens) |
| git.status | 0.015        | **0.35** (+ token "git")         |
| git.push   | 0.014        | **0.32** (+ token "git")         |

**Improvement**: `git.commit` surpasses `git.status` by 3x+, with excellent discriminability.

## Code Structure

```
packages/rust/crates/omni-vector/
├── keyword.rs              # Weighted RRF algorithm
│   ├── RRF_K = 10.0        # High precision factor
│   ├── SEMANTIC_WEIGHT = 1.0
│   ├── KEYWORD_WEIGHT = 1.5
│   ├── NAME_TOKEN_BOOST = 0.2
│   ├── EXACT_PHRASE_BOOST = 0.5
│   └── apply_weighted_rrf()  # Core fusion algorithm
│
└── search.rs               # Hybrid Search caller
    └── hybrid_search()     # Uses apply_weighted_rrf

packages/rust/bindings/python/src/vector/
└── search_ops.rs           # Canonical payload shaping + confidence/final-score emission
```

## Usage Examples

### Python API

```python
from omni.core.router.hybrid_search import HybridSearch

search = HybridSearch()
results = await search.search("git commit", limit=5)

# Results include canonical confidence/final_score from Rust payload
for r in results:
    print(
        f"{r['id']}: raw={r['score']:.3f}, final={r['final_score']:.3f}, "
        f"confidence={r['confidence']}"
    )
```

Output:

```
git.commit: raw=1.10, final=0.95, confidence=high
git.status: raw=0.35, final=0.35, confidence=low
```

### View Algorithm Parameters

```python
search = HybridSearch()
print(search.stats())
```

Output:

```python
{
    "semantic_weight": 1.0,
    "keyword_weight": 1.5,
    "rrf_k": 10,
    "implementation": "rust-native-weighted-rrf",
    "strategy": "weighted_rrf_field_boosting",
    "field_boosting": {
        "name_token_boost": 0.2,
        "exact_phrase_boost": 0.5,
    },
}
```

## Performance Benchmarks

| Scenario               | Standard RRF | Weighted RRF | Improvement |
| ---------------------- | ------------ | ------------ | ----------- |
| First Query (Cold)     | 45ms         | 48ms         | +3ms        |
| Cached Query (Hot)     | 12ms         | 13ms         | +1ms        |
| Ranking Accuracy (MRR) | 0.72         | 0.91         | +26%        |

**Conclusion**: Minimal overhead for significant accuracy improvement.

## References

1. **MariaDB Engineering (2025)**: "Optimizing Hybrid Search with Reciprocal Rank Fusion"
   - `k=10` is optimal for high-precision scenarios

2. **ParadeDB (2024)**: "What is Reciprocal Rank Fusion?"
   - Weighted RRF theoretical foundation

3. **Zaragoza et al.**: "BM25F: A Structured Information Retrieval Function"
   - Field-Level Boosting principles

4. **TopK.io (2025)**: "Beyond RRF: How TopK Improves Hybrid Search"
   - Outlier Mitigation strategies

## Related Documentation

- [Router Architecture](../architecture/router.md)
- [Hybrid Search Tests](../../../../tests/units/test_router/test_hybrid_search.py)
- [Rust Keyword Index](keyword_index.md)

Commit message:

feat(rust): bridge telegram and reimplement the knowledge graph system

docs/reference/weighted-rrf.md, after:

# Weighted RRF + Field Boosting - SOTA Hybrid Search

> Trinity Architecture - Router Layer (L2 Semantic)
> Last Updated: 2026-01-27

A hybrid retrieval algorithm based on 2024-2025 cutting-edge research, combining **Weighted Reciprocal Rank Fusion (WRRF)** with **BM25F-inspired Field Boosting**.

## Theoretical Background

### Problem: The "Smoothing Trap" of Standard RRF

Standard RRF (`k=60`) is too smooth, resulting in minimal ranking differences:

| Rank | Standard RRF Score | Problem              |
| ---- | ------------------ | -------------------- |
| #1   | 0.0163             | Low discriminability |
| #5   | 0.0153             | Only 6% difference   |

For **Precision-Critical** scenarios like code tools, this fails to effectively distinguish between `git.commit` and `git.status`.

### Solutions

1. **Weighted RRF**: Introduce weighted differentiation for signal sources
2. **Low-k**: Use `k=10` to increase ranking sensitivity
3. **Field Boosting**: Inject exact match signals

## Algorithm Details

### 1. Weighted Vector Stream

```
RRF_vector = W_semantic * (1 / (k + rank + 1))
```

Parameters:

- `W_semantic = 1.0`
- `k = 10` (high precision mode)

### 2. Weighted Keyword Stream

```
RRF_keyword = W_keyword * (1 / (k + rank + 1))
```

Parameters:

- `W_keyword = 1.5` (keywords weighted higher for code scenarios)

### 3. Dynamic Field Boosting (The Magic Step)

Solves the confidence flattening problem by injecting hard signals:

```rust
// Token Match Boost: +0.2 per matched term
for term in query_parts {
    if name_lower.contains(term) {
        match_count += 1;
    }
}
entry.score += match_count * 0.2;

// Exact Phrase Match: +0.5
if name_lower.contains(&query_lower) {
    entry.score += 0.5;
}
```

### 4. Confidence Calibration (Rust Binding)

Raw RRF scores are calibrated in Rust payload emission:

| Condition                   | Confidence | Final Score Formula                          |
| --------------------------- | ---------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| `score >= high_threshold`   | `high`     | `min(high_cap, high_base + score*scale)`     |
| `score >= medium_threshold` | `medium`   | `min(medium_cap, medium_base + score*scale)` |
| otherwise                   | `low`      | `max(low_floor, score)`                      |

The profile is configured from settings (system: packages/conf/settings.yaml, user: $PRJ_CONFIG_HOME/omni-dev-fusion/settings.yaml; `router.search.*`) and passed to Rust.

## Configuration

### Default Values (Code Search Optimization)

```python
{
    "rrf_k": 10,              # High precision factor
    "semantic_weight": 1.0,   # Vector weight
    "keyword_weight": 1.5,    # Keyword weight (higher for code)
    "name_token_boost": 0.2,  # Token match boost
    "exact_phrase_boost": 0.5, # Phrase match boost
}
```

### Scenario-Specific Configurations

```python
# High Precision (Code Tools)
search.stats() => {
    "rrf_k": 10,
    "keyword_weight": 1.5,
}

# High Recall (Chat/Q&A)
search.stats() => {
    "rrf_k": 60,
    "keyword_weight": 1.0,
}
```

## Effect Comparison

### Query: `"git commit"`

| Tool       | Standard RRF | Weighted RRF + Boosting          |
| ---------- | ------------ | -------------------------------- |
| git.commit | 0.016        | **1.1** (+ exact match + tokens) |
| git.status | 0.015        | **0.35** (+ token "git")         |
| git.push   | 0.014        | **0.32** (+ token "git")         |

**Improvement**: `git.commit` surpasses `git.status` by 3x+, with excellent discriminability.

## Code Structure

```
packages/rust/crates/omni-vector/
├── keyword.rs              # Weighted RRF algorithm
│   ├── RRF_K = 10.0        # High precision factor
│   ├── SEMANTIC_WEIGHT = 1.0
│   ├── KEYWORD_WEIGHT = 1.5
│   ├── NAME_TOKEN_BOOST = 0.2
│   ├── EXACT_PHRASE_BOOST = 0.5
│   └── apply_weighted_rrf()  # Core fusion algorithm
│
└── search.rs               # Hybrid Search caller
    └── hybrid_search()     # Uses apply_weighted_rrf

packages/rust/bindings/python/src/vector/
└── search_ops.rs           # Canonical payload shaping + confidence/final-score emission
```

## Usage Examples

### Python API

```python
from omni.core.router.hybrid_search import HybridSearch

search = HybridSearch()
results = await search.search("git commit", limit=5)

# Results include canonical confidence/final_score from Rust payload
for r in results:
    print(
        f"{r['id']}: raw={r['score']:.3f}, final={r['final_score']:.3f}, "
        f"confidence={r['confidence']}"
    )
```

Output:

```
git.commit: raw=1.10, final=0.95, confidence=high
git.status: raw=0.35, final=0.35, confidence=low
```

### View Algorithm Parameters

```python
search = HybridSearch()
print(search.stats())
```

Output:

```python
{
    "semantic_weight": 1.0,
    "keyword_weight": 1.5,
    "rrf_k": 10,
    "implementation": "rust-native-weighted-rrf",
    "strategy": "weighted_rrf_field_boosting",
    "field_boosting": {
        "name_token_boost": 0.2,
        "exact_phrase_boost": 0.5,
    },
}
```

## Performance Benchmarks

| Scenario               | Standard RRF | Weighted RRF | Improvement |
| ---------------------- | ------------ | ------------ | ----------- |
| First Query (Cold)     | 45ms         | 48ms         | +3ms        |
| Cached Query (Hot)     | 12ms         | 13ms         | +1ms        |
| Ranking Accuracy (MRR) | 0.72         | 0.91         | +26%        |

**Conclusion**: Minimal overhead for significant accuracy improvement.

## References

1. **MariaDB Engineering (2025)**: "Optimizing Hybrid Search with Reciprocal Rank Fusion"
   - `k=10` is optimal for high-precision scenarios

2. **ParadeDB (2024)**: "What is Reciprocal Rank Fusion?"
   - Weighted RRF theoretical foundation

3. **Zaragoza et al.**: "BM25F: A Structured Information Retrieval Function"
   - Field-Level Boosting principles

4. **TopK.io (2025)**: "Beyond RRF: How TopK Improves Hybrid Search"
   - Outlier Mitigation strategies

## Related Documentation

- [Router Architecture](../architecture/router.md)
- [Hybrid Search Tests](../../../../tests/units/test_router/test_hybrid_search.py)
- [Rust Keyword Index](keyword_index.md)
