docs/explanation/why-nix-is-the-agent-runtime.md, before:

# Why Nix Is the Agent Runtime

> **The Core Thesis**: Probabilistic AI (Chaos) meets Deterministic Engineering (Order). Nix is the bridge that makes autonomous agents possible.

---

## 1. The Conflict: Chaos vs. Order

### The Problem with Probabilistic AI

LLMs like Claude are **probabilistic**. They generate code based on patterns, not guarantees.

**A typical failure scenario:**

```bash
# You ask the AI
> Write a script that reads an Excel file and processes the data

# The AI generates
import pandas as pd
import openpyxl

df = pd.read_excel('data.xlsx')
print(df.head())
```

**What the AI assumed:**

| Assumption                   | Reality                                |
| ---------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `pandas` is installed        | It might not be in the environment     |
| Python version is compatible | The code might use Python 3.12 syntax  |
| `libc` version matches       | The container uses `musl`, not `glibc` |
| The file exists              | No validation, no error handling       |

**Result:** The script fails. The AI doesn't know why. The loop begins.

### The AI's Blind Spot

The AI operates in a **vacuum**:

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         THE AI'S WORLD                  │
│                                         │
│  "I know Python syntax"                 │
│  "I know pandas API"                    │
│  "I don't know what's installed"        │
│  "I don't know the OS version"          │
│  "I don't know the project structure"   │
│                                         │
│  ❌ Missing: GROUND TRUTH               │
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

This is the **Context Gap**. Without the ground truth, the AI is guessing.

---

## 2. The Bridge: Nix as Ground Truth

### What Is Ground Truth?

Ground truth is the **actual state** of the system, not what we assume.

| What We Assume             | Ground Truth (Nix)                                                                  |
| -------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| "Python is installed"      | `python3 = pkgs.python311` in `devenv.nix`                                          |
| "pandas is available"      | `pandas = ps.overridePythonAttrs(old: { propagatedBuildInputs = [pkgs.pandas]; });` |
| "The system has glibc"     | `NIX_SKIP_SANDBOX = 1` (for Docker)                                                 |
| "The environment is clean" | Every dependency is declared, nothing implicit                                      |

### How Nix Closes the Gap

Nix doesn't just manage packages. It **declares reality**.

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         NIX DECLARES REALITY            │
│                                         │
│  devenv.nix                             │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────┐    │
│  │ languages.python.enable = true  │    │
│  │ languages.python.version = "3.11"│   │
│  │ languages.python.libraries = [  │    │
│  │   "pandas"                      │    │
│  │   "openpyxl"                    │    │
│  │ ]                               │    │
│  └─────────────────────────────────┘    │
│                                         │
│  ✅ This is the GROUND TRUTH            │
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

When the AI knows the ground truth, it stops guessing.

---

## 3. Deep Exploration: Three Paths to Agentic Infrastructure

### Path 1: Context Injection (The Foundation)

**Goal**: Eliminate the Context Gap.

**How it works:**

1. Parse `devenv.nix` at startup
2. Inject environment info into the AI's system prompt
3. The AI now knows what's available

**Example: System Prompt Injection**

```python
# mcp-server/orchestrator.py

def build_agent_context():
    env_info = {
        "python_version": "3.11",
        "available_packages": ["pandas", "openpyxl", "numpy"],
        "system": "Darwin 24.0.0",
        "nixpkgs_channel": "nixpkgs-unstable"
    }

    return f"""
    You are running in a Nix environment.
    - Python version: {env_info['python_version']}
    - Available packages: {', '.join(env_info['available_packages'])}
    - DO NOT run `pip install`. Instead, edit devenv.nix to add dependencies.
    - Run `devenv up` to apply changes.
    """
```

**Before (The AI guesses):**

```
> Install the library
> pip install pandas  # FAILS - pip not available in pure Nix shell
```

**After (The AI knows):**

```
> I need pandas for this task.
> I'll add it to devenv.nix first.
> [Edits devenv.nix]
> devenv up
> Now I can write the Python script.
```

---

### Path 2: Agentic Infrastructure (The Revolution)

**Goal**: Let the AI manage its own environment.

**The scenario:**

```bash
# You ask the AI
> Write a script that uses Redis to cache API responses
```

**The AI's thought process (internal):**

```
1. Check: Is Redis available?
   → devenv.nix shows: redis not in services.redis.enable

2. Decision: I need to add Redis first.

3. Action: Edit devenv.nix
   → services.redis.enable = true

4. Action: Run devenv up
   → Redis starts in the background

5. Action: Write the Python script
   → Uses redis-py, connects to localhost:6379
```

**The AI doesn't just write code. It manages infrastructure.**

**Why this matters:**

| Traditional Workflow           | Agentic Workflow            |
| ------------------------------ | --------------------------- |
| Human installs Redis           | AI installs Redis           |
| Human configures service       | AI configures service       |
| Human runs the script          | AI runs the script          |
| Human fixes environment issues | AI fixes environment issues |

**The AI becomes a full-stack developer, not just a code generator.**

---

### Path 3: Hermetic Execution (The Safety Layer)

**Goal**: Run AI-generated code safely.

**The problem:** AI code can be malicious or buggy.

**The solution:** Nix sandbox.

**How it works:**

```python
# mcp-server/coder.py

async def run_safely(script: str, dependencies: list[str]) -> dict:
    """
    Execute a script in an ephemeral Nix sandbox.
    """
    # Generate a temporary flake
    flake_content = f'''
    {{
      inputs = {{ nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixpkgs-unstable"; }};
      outputs = {{ self, nixpkgs }}: {{
        devShells.x86_64-darwin.default = import ./devenv.nix {{
          pkgs = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.x86_64-darwin;
          libs = [{", ".join(f'"{d}"' for d in dependencies)}];
        }};
      }};
    }}

    {{ self, nixpkgs, ... }}@inputs:
    let
      pkgs = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.x86_64-darwin;
    in
    {{
      default = pkgs.mkShell {{
        packages = [ pkgs.python311 ] ++ (with pkgs; [
          python311Packages.pandas
          python311Packages.redis
        ]);
      }};
    }}
    '''

    # Write and run in sandbox
    result = subprocess.run(
        ["nix", "run", ".", "--command", f"python -c '{script}'"],
        sandbox=True,  # Nix sandbox restrictions
        timeout=30
    )

    return {
        "exit_code": result.returncode,
        "stdout": result.stdout,
        "stderr": result.stderr
    }
```

**What the sandbox prevents:**

| Dangerous Action     | Sandbox Outcome                |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| `rm -rf /`           | Blocked - read-only filesystem |
| `curl \| sh`         | Blocked - no network access    |
| Infinite loop        | Blocked - 30s timeout          |
| Access `/etc/passwd` | Blocked - no permission        |

**The AI can code freely. The sandbox keeps us safe.**

---

## 4. The Vision: Environment-Driven Development (EDD)

### From Human-Driven to Environment-Driven

| Era     | Paradigm         | Who Manages Environment             |
| ------- | ---------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| **1.0** | Manual           | Human installs everything           |
| **2.0** | Containerized    | Docker Compose defines environment  |
| **3.0** | Nix-powered      | `devenv.nix` defines environment    |
| **4.0** | **Agent-driven** | AI manages `devenv.nix` dynamically |

### The EDD Workflow

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         ENVIRONMENT-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT          │
│                                                 │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  User: "Build a REST API with Redis"      │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                      ↓                          │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  AI: Parses devenv.nix                    │  │
│  │      → Checks: Redis not enabled          │  │
│  │      → Edits: services.redis.enable = true│  │
│  │      → Runs: devenv up                    │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                      ↓                          │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  AI: Writes Python + FastAPI code         │  │
│  │      → Uses redis-py                      │  │
│  │      → Connects to localhost:6379         │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                      ↓                          │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  AI: Runs tests in sandbox                │  │
│  │      → All tests pass                     │  │
│  │      → Guarantees reproducibility         │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                      ↓                          │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Human: Reviews PR, clicks "Approve"      │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                                                 │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### The Value Proposition

| For the AI                 | For the Human                        |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| Knows the ground truth     | No more "works on my machine"        |
| Can modify its environment | No more manual dependency management |
| Runs in a safe sandbox     | No more security vulnerabilities     |
| Guarantees reproducibility | No more CI failures                  |

---

## 5. Design Decisions & Trade-offs

| Decision                   | Why We Chose It (Pros)      | What We Sacrificed (Cons)    |
| -------------------------- | --------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| **Nix for environment**    | Deterministic, reproducible | Learning curve for new users |
| **AI modifies devenv.nix** | Agentic autonomy            | Requires careful sandboxing  |
| **Ephemeral sandbox**      | Safety from malicious code  | Slight overhead for each run |
| **Context injection**      | AI knows ground truth       | System prompt length limits  |

---

## 6. Getting Started: The First Experiment

**Try this yourself:**

1. Ask the AI: _"Add Redis support to this project"_
2. Watch the AI:
   - Read `devenv.nix`
   - Add `services.redis.enable = true`
   - Run `devenv up`
   - Write Python code using `redis-py`
3. Verify:
   - `redis-cli ping` returns PONG
   - The Python script connects successfully

**Expected result:** The AI managed infrastructure, not just code.

---

## Related Documentation

- [Tutorial: Getting Started with Fusion](../tutorials/getting-started.md)
- [Existential Value: Why Fusion Exists](./why-fusion-exists.md)
- [Technical Bet: Why Nix?](./why-nix-for-ai.md)
- [Vision: Agentic OS](./vision-agentic-os.md)

---

## Appendix: Counterarguments

### "Nix is too complex for AI to understand."

We agree. But AI doesn't need to understand Nix deeply.

**What AI needs to know:**

- "Add this package to `devenv.nix`"
- "Run `devenv up` to apply"

**What AI doesn't need to know:**

- How Nix evaluates derivations
- The Nix store structure
- Content-addressable storage

**We abstract complexity. The AI works at the right level of abstraction.**

### "Letting AI modify my environment is dangerous."

We agree. That's why we have:

| Safety Layer       | What It Does                                |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------- |
| **Sandbox**        | Restricts filesystem and network access     |
| **Git**            | Every change is a commit, easily revertible |
| **Human approval** | PR review before merge                      |
| **Whitelist**      | Only approved `devenv.nix` edits allowed    |

**We don't give AI root access. We give AI proposal power. Human approval remains.**

---

_The environment is the foundation. Nix provides the foundation. AI builds on it._

---

_Built on standards. Not reinventing the wheel._

Commit message:

refactor(agent): Sidecar Execution Pattern with CLI modularization
- Add Sidecar Execution Pattern for heavy dependencies (crawl4ai, playwright)
  - tools.py: lightweight shim (no heavy imports)
  - scripts/engine.py: heavy implementation
  - pyproject.toml: isolated uv environment

- Modularize CLI into atomic structure
  - cli/commands/mcp.py, cli/commands/skill.py
  - cli/app.py, cli/console.py, cli/runner.py

- Add testing framework (test_cli.py, context.py)
- Add common.isolation module for subprocess execution
- Add log_config.py for structured logging
- Remove outdated explanation docs (consolidated)

docs/explanation/why-nix-is-the-agent-runtime.md, after:

# Why Nix Is the Agent Runtime

> **Status**: ⚠️ LEGACY - Historical rationale (Phase 1-5), preserved for context
> **Note**: Nix is still used for system-level dependencies

---

## 1. The Conflict: Chaos vs. Order

### The Problem with Probabilistic AI

LLMs like Claude are **probabilistic**. They generate code based on patterns, not guarantees.

**A typical failure scenario:**

```bash
# You ask the AI
> Write a script that reads an Excel file and processes the data

# The AI generates
import pandas as pd
import openpyxl

df = pd.read_excel('data.xlsx')
print(df.head())
```

**What the AI assumed:**

| Assumption                   | Reality                                |
| ---------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| `pandas` is installed        | It might not be in the environment     |
| Python version is compatible | The code might use Python 3.12 syntax  |
| `libc` version matches       | The container uses `musl`, not `glibc` |
| The file exists              | No validation, no error handling       |

**Result:** The script fails. The AI doesn't know why. The loop begins.

### The AI's Blind Spot

The AI operates in a **vacuum**:

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         THE AI'S WORLD                  │
│                                         │
│  "I know Python syntax"                 │
│  "I know pandas API"                    │
│  "I don't know what's installed"        │
│  "I don't know the OS version"          │
│  "I don't know the project structure"   │
│                                         │
│  ❌ Missing: GROUND TRUTH               │
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

This is the **Context Gap**. Without the ground truth, the AI is guessing.

---

## 2. The Bridge: Nix as Ground Truth

### What Is Ground Truth?

Ground truth is the **actual state** of the system, not what we assume.

| What We Assume             | Ground Truth (Nix)                                                                  |
| -------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| "Python is installed"      | `python3 = pkgs.python311` in `devenv.nix`                                          |
| "pandas is available"      | `pandas = ps.overridePythonAttrs(old: { propagatedBuildInputs = [pkgs.pandas]; });` |
| "The system has glibc"     | `NIX_SKIP_SANDBOX = 1` (for Docker)                                                 |
| "The environment is clean" | Every dependency is declared, nothing implicit                                      |

### How Nix Closes the Gap

Nix doesn't just manage packages. It **declares reality**.

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         NIX DECLARES REALITY            │
│                                         │
│  devenv.nix                             │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────┐    │
│  │ languages.python.enable = true  │    │
│  │ languages.python.version = "3.11"│   │
│  │ languages.python.libraries = [  │    │
│  │   "pandas"                      │    │
│  │   "openpyxl"                    │    │
│  │ ]                               │    │
│  └─────────────────────────────────┘    │
│                                         │
│  ✅ This is the GROUND TRUTH            │
└─────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

When the AI knows the ground truth, it stops guessing.

---

## 3. Deep Exploration: Three Paths to Agentic Infrastructure

### Path 1: Context Injection (The Foundation)

**Goal**: Eliminate the Context Gap.

**How it works:**

1. Parse `devenv.nix` at startup
2. Inject environment info into the AI's system prompt
3. The AI now knows what's available

**Example: System Prompt Injection**

```python
# mcp-server/orchestrator.py

def build_agent_context():
    env_info = {
        "python_version": "3.11",
        "available_packages": ["pandas", "openpyxl", "numpy"],
        "system": "Darwin 24.0.0",
        "nixpkgs_channel": "nixpkgs-unstable"
    }

    return f"""
    You are running in a Nix environment.
    - Python version: {env_info['python_version']}
    - Available packages: {', '.join(env_info['available_packages'])}
    - DO NOT run `pip install`. Instead, edit devenv.nix to add dependencies.
    - Run `devenv up` to apply changes.
    """
```

**Before (The AI guesses):**

```
> Install the library
> pip install pandas  # FAILS - pip not available in pure Nix shell
```

**After (The AI knows):**

```
> I need pandas for this task.
> I'll add it to devenv.nix first.
> [Edits devenv.nix]
> devenv up
> Now I can write the Python script.
```

---

### Path 2: Agentic Infrastructure (The Revolution)

**Goal**: Let the AI manage its own environment.

**The scenario:**

```bash
# You ask the AI
> Write a script that uses Redis to cache API responses
```

**The AI's thought process (internal):**

```
1. Check: Is Redis available?
   → devenv.nix shows: redis not in services.redis.enable

2. Decision: I need to add Redis first.

3. Action: Edit devenv.nix
   → services.redis.enable = true

4. Action: Run devenv up
   → Redis starts in the background

5. Action: Write the Python script
   → Uses redis-py, connects to localhost:6379
```

**The AI doesn't just write code. It manages infrastructure.**

**Why this matters:**

| Traditional Workflow           | Agentic Workflow            |
| ------------------------------ | --------------------------- |
| Human installs Redis           | AI installs Redis           |
| Human configures service       | AI configures service       |
| Human runs the script          | AI runs the script          |
| Human fixes environment issues | AI fixes environment issues |

**The AI becomes a full-stack developer, not just a code generator.**

---

### Path 3: Hermetic Execution (The Safety Layer)

**Goal**: Run AI-generated code safely.

**The problem:** AI code can be malicious or buggy.

**The solution:** Nix sandbox.

**How it works:**

```python
# mcp-server/coder.py

async def run_safely(script: str, dependencies: list[str]) -> dict:
    """
    Execute a script in an ephemeral Nix sandbox.
    """
    # Generate a temporary flake
    flake_content = f'''
    {{
      inputs = {{ nixpkgs.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs/nixpkgs-unstable"; }};
      outputs = {{ self, nixpkgs }}: {{
        devShells.x86_64-darwin.default = import ./devenv.nix {{
          pkgs = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.x86_64-darwin;
          libs = [{", ".join(f'"{d}"' for d in dependencies)}];
        }};
      }};
    }}

    {{ self, nixpkgs, ... }}@inputs:
    let
      pkgs = nixpkgs.legacyPackages.x86_64-darwin;
    in
    {{
      default = pkgs.mkShell {{
        packages = [ pkgs.python311 ] ++ (with pkgs; [
          python311Packages.pandas
          python311Packages.redis
        ]);
      }};
    }}
    '''

    # Write and run in sandbox
    result = subprocess.run(
        ["nix", "run", ".", "--command", f"python -c '{script}'"],
        sandbox=True,  # Nix sandbox restrictions
        timeout=30
    )

    return {
        "exit_code": result.returncode,
        "stdout": result.stdout,
        "stderr": result.stderr
    }
```

**What the sandbox prevents:**

| Dangerous Action     | Sandbox Outcome                |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| `rm -rf /`           | Blocked - read-only filesystem |
| `curl \| sh`         | Blocked - no network access    |
| Infinite loop        | Blocked - 30s timeout          |
| Access `/etc/passwd` | Blocked - no permission        |

**The AI can code freely. The sandbox keeps us safe.**

---

## 4. The Vision: Environment-Driven Development (EDD)

### From Human-Driven to Environment-Driven

| Era     | Paradigm         | Who Manages Environment             |
| ------- | ---------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| **1.0** | Manual           | Human installs everything           |
| **2.0** | Containerized    | Docker Compose defines environment  |
| **3.0** | Nix-powered      | `devenv.nix` defines environment    |
| **4.0** | **Agent-driven** | AI manages `devenv.nix` dynamically |

### The EDD Workflow

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         ENVIRONMENT-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT          │
│                                                 │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  User: "Build a REST API with Redis"      │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                      ↓                          │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  AI: Parses devenv.nix                    │  │
│  │      → Checks: Redis not enabled          │  │
│  │      → Edits: services.redis.enable = true│  │
│  │      → Runs: devenv up                    │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                      ↓                          │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  AI: Writes Python + FastAPI code         │  │
│  │      → Uses redis-py                      │  │
│  │      → Connects to localhost:6379         │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                      ↓                          │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  AI: Runs tests in sandbox                │  │
│  │      → All tests pass                     │  │
│  │      → Guarantees reproducibility         │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                      ↓                          │
│  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │  Human: Reviews PR, clicks "Approve"      │  │
│  └───────────────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                                                 │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### The Value Proposition

| For the AI                 | For the Human                        |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------ |
| Knows the ground truth     | No more "works on my machine"        |
| Can modify its environment | No more manual dependency management |
| Runs in a safe sandbox     | No more security vulnerabilities     |
| Guarantees reproducibility | No more CI failures                  |

---

## 5. Design Decisions & Trade-offs

| Decision                   | Why We Chose It (Pros)      | What We Sacrificed (Cons)    |
| -------------------------- | --------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| **Nix for environment**    | Deterministic, reproducible | Learning curve for new users |
| **AI modifies devenv.nix** | Agentic autonomy            | Requires careful sandboxing  |
| **Ephemeral sandbox**      | Safety from malicious code  | Slight overhead for each run |
| **Context injection**      | AI knows ground truth       | System prompt length limits  |

---

## 6. Getting Started: The First Experiment

**Try this yourself:**

1. Ask the AI: _"Add Redis support to this project"_
2. Watch the AI:
   - Read `devenv.nix`
   - Add `services.redis.enable = true`
   - Run `devenv up`
   - Write Python code using `redis-py`
3. Verify:
   - `redis-cli ping` returns PONG
   - The Python script connects successfully

**Expected result:** The AI managed infrastructure, not just code.

---

## Related Documentation

- [Tutorial: Getting Started with Fusion](../tutorials/getting-started.md)
- [Existential Value: Why Fusion Exists](./why-fusion-exists.md)
- [Technical Bet: Why Nix?](./why-nix-for-ai.md)
- [Vision: Agentic OS](./vision-agentic-os.md)

---

## Appendix: Counterarguments

### "Nix is too complex for AI to understand."

We agree. But AI doesn't need to understand Nix deeply.

**What AI needs to know:**

- "Add this package to `devenv.nix`"
- "Run `devenv up` to apply"

**What AI doesn't need to know:**

- How Nix evaluates derivations
- The Nix store structure
- Content-addressable storage

**We abstract complexity. The AI works at the right level of abstraction.**

### "Letting AI modify my environment is dangerous."

We agree. That's why we have:

| Safety Layer       | What It Does                                |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------------- |
| **Sandbox**        | Restricts filesystem and network access     |
| **Git**            | Every change is a commit, easily revertible |
| **Human approval** | PR review before merge                      |
| **Whitelist**      | Only approved `devenv.nix` edits allowed    |

**We don't give AI root access. We give AI proposal power. Human approval remains.**

---

_The environment is the foundation. Nix provides the foundation. AI builds on it._

---

_Built on standards. Not reinventing the wheel._
